# jDataAnalysis - Data Analysis with Java

## What is it?
The project **jDataAnalysis** is about a series of design studies carried out
in a JavaFX environment. It deals with how to plot experimental data using Java
together with third party libraries. This project is divided into two parts. 
While the first part contains classes that rely on the JavaFX chart package including [ExtJFX](https://github.com/extjfx/extjfx)
to display animated charts.
However, the second part sticks to the third party library [HanSolo](https://github.com/HanSolo/charts)
to plot the data.

## System Requirements
**JDK**:
* The project has been tested with JDK 21.0.2. Both the Java compiler and Java runtime (JRE) need to 
support 64-bit. Compatible Java compilers as well as JREs can be 
downloaded from [Bellsoft](https://bell-sw.com/pages/downloads/).

**pHCalc**
* This program generates the test data for the titration curves. You can download
a jar file from this [link](https://github.com/amxyz-cyber/pHCalc).

## Compiling jDataAnalysis
If you decide to compile this project then you can do it with [maven](https://maven.apache.org/).
Under Linux open a terminal and go to the directory of this project. 
Then run the following command which will compile the source files:
```bash
$ mvn clean package
```

After a successful compilation the `.jar` file together with the 
libraries will be placed in the subfolder called `target`.

## Installing jDataAnalysis
If you want to use the provided binaries, i.e. the release package
instead, then the installation process is simple:

1. Unpack the archive where you would like to store the binaries, e.g.:
* Unix-based operating systems (Linux, Solaris and Mac OS X)
	```bash
	$ tar zxvf charts_animated-x.y.z.tar.gz
	```
* Windows
	```bash
	unzip charts_animated-x.y.z.zip
	```
2. A directory called "charts_animated-x.y.z" will be created.

## Starting jDataAnalysis
* Unix-based operating systems (Linux, Solaris and Mac OS X)
	```bash
	$ java -jar charts_animated-x.y.z.jar
	```
* Windows
> Right-click on `charts_animated-x.y.z.exe` > **Open**.

## Usage
Basically, this program allows for the creation of one plot at a time. In order
to select a plot, just uncomment the call to one of the methods beginning with `test`
in `App.java`. Afterwards, you can compile the project and restart `jDataAnalysis` .
Alternatively, just import the whole project into your IDE, in which you basically 
uncomment one of the test methods. To execute the project in your IDE, you 
need to select the file containing the main method and hit the play button.

## Plots
### First Part contains animated charts
1. Pie Chart
This pie chart relies on the dataset [Desktop Operating System Market Share Worldwide] (https://gs.statcounter.com/os-market-share/desktop/worldwide). 
The data has been already downloaded and stored in `os_combined-ww-monthly-202306-202406.csv`. It has been realized by the classes MainVC and MainView respectively.

2. Bar Chart
This animated bar chart plots the annual revenues from [Texas Instruments] (https://www.macrotrends.net/stocks/charts/TXN/texas-instruments/revenue). 
The downloaded data has been stored in `texas-instruments-revenues.csv`. It has been realized by the classes BarVC and BarView respectively.

3. Area Chart
The animated area chart relies on the dataset `durchschnittssaldo2.csv` which contains the daily balances from a bank account for a specific year. 
It has been realized by the classes AreaVC and AreaView respectively.

4. Scatter Plot
The animated scatter plot is based on the [red wine dataset] (https://www.kaggle.com/datasets/uciml/red-wine-quality-cortez-et-al-2009). 
After having stored the data in `winequality-red.csv`, the plot is finally plotted using the classes ScatterVC and ScatterView respectively.

5. Heatmap
This heatmap is a mixture of the javafx package as well as the third party library 
from the CERN institute. It tries to plot the effects of alcohol on the pH using
the aforementioned red wine dataset. It has been realized by the classes XYZVC and XYZView respectively.

6. Line Chart
The line charts displays the titration of phosphoric acid with sodium hydroxide. 
The data has been generated using [pHCalc](https://github.com/amxyz-cyber/pHCalc)
as a third party library. 

### Second Part uses the HanSolo library
1. Grid
The purpose of this plot is to display a simple grid with two axis and the minor ticks. 
It has been realized by the classes HSGridVC and HSGrid respectively.

2. Coxcom
This coxcom chart displays the most used desktop operating systems mentioned earlier.
It has been realized by the classes HSCoxComVC and HSCoxComView respectively.

3. Line Chart
This line chart plots the data generated by `pHCalc`. It has been realized by the
classes HSTitrationVC and HSTitrationView respectively. 

4. Line Chart
Another line chart that displays the daily balances mentioned above. It has been 
realized by the classes HSBalancesVC and HSBalancesView respectively. 

5. Time chart
This time chart uses a time based x-axis to display to how often bicycles were 
rented within 24 hours. It relies on the [Ford GoBike dataset](https://s3.amazonaws.com/fordgobike-data/index.html).
However, the cleaned dataset can be downloaded from this github account (https://github.com/amxyz-cyber/Udacity-DAND-DataVisualization-Ford-GoBike/blob/master/fordgobike.zip).
It has been realized by the classes HSTimeVC and HSTimeView respectively. 

6. Scatter Plot
It is an unanimated scatter plot which uses the red wine dataset, too. The x and y
variables are basically the same but with a different look. 
It has been realized by the classes HSWineVC and HSWineView respectively. 

7. Bubble Grid Chart
This bubble grid chart is used for plotting a carnot process. It relies on the
data stored in `carnot-process.csv`. It has been realized by the classes HSProcessesVC
and HSProcessesView respectively.

8. Parallel Coordinates Chart
This chart displays the test results from a client/server test whose data
can be found in `servertests.csv`. It has been realized by the classes HSServerTestVC
and HSServerTestView respectively.

9. Bar Chart
Another bar chart which displays the revenues of some multinationals. The data
has been provided by [macrotrends](www.macrotrends.net) and placed in `revenues-2023.csv`.
It has been realized by the classes HSRevenueVC and HSRevenueView respectively.

10. Heatmap
This heatmap based on the third party library mentioned earlier displays the
influences of both alcohol and pH on the quality of wine. It has been realized by 
the classes HSWineVC and HSWineView respectively. 

